welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson be sure to join us on facebook
at facebook.com forward slash UNC
knowledge facebook.com forward slash
hunk
knowledge put up questions suggestions
for guests comments dr. David Berlinski
is the author of many books including
most recently one two three absolutely
elementary mathematics one two three is
about the peak of my own mathematical
form but the prose is so irresistible I
channel even if you're as much of a math
of phobe as I am you will not be able to
put it down an earlier book in the book
will spend most of our time discussing
today is the devil's delusion atheism
and its scientific pretensions we should
establish your professional background
is your polymath but it's mathematics
you're a mathematician if you have to be
one thing we'd call you a mathematician
isn't that right I certainly a few feel
free to call me mathematician but I
would so much prefer being called a
writer because that's what I do with my
time as it happens I write a lot about
mathematics all right okay I'm happy to
do that I can confirm that you're a
writer I couldn't possibly produce a
testimony that your mathematician we're
better off that way or better off fine
segment one scientific pretensions from
the devil's delusion quote a great many
men and women have a dull hurt angry
sense of being oppressed by the sciences
they're frustrated by endless scientific
boasting they suspect that the
scientific community holds them in
contempt they are right to feel this way
close quote
explain that it seems to me that anyone
living in the United States or even in
Europe um this isn't purely an American
phenomena has this feeling that there a
group of experts a band of happy experts
and as experts will do they derive
enormous pleasure from telling the rest
of us how to think what to think what
doctrines to a pole what positions to
defend and this conspiracy among experts
if it is delivered in small manageable
doses for it
alone a doctor's office one is generally
happy to receive a doctor's note with
your Pokemon yeah I take an injection
that's fine but as a cultural as a
social as an ideological phenomenon it
gets on everyone's nerves after a while
and what headline in any newspaper is
more apt to provoke a sense of
aggression and disbelief than scientists
say no you know what's coming afterwards
it's not the scientist saying anything
it's political
political relations Department of the of
the scientific community their publicity
apparatus they're telling the scientists
what the scientists think they should
say to the public and within 24 hours
what serious scientists say has changed
overnight look at the history of
Medicine over the last 50 years
one triumphant imbecility after another
revealed to be a fraud so there's a deep
and I think my words were well chosen
deep hurt perplexed sense of being
oppressed by the scientific community
that many respects doesn't know what
it's talking about not all obviously not
all but in many respects the
boastfulness is with so irritating and
in this book the particular form the
boastfulness takes that you wish to
refute his scientists saying uh-uh yeah
yeah we've discovered we know there is
no God no and we know there's no God
because we are scientists exactly and
you know art from the devil's delusion
again David in many respects the word
naturalism comes closest to conveying
what scientists regard is the spirit of
science the source of its superiority to
religious thought but what reason is
there to conclude that everything is to
quote philosopher Alexander Bern an
aspect of the universe revealed by the
Natural Sciences there is no reason at
all
close quote now you need to unpack that
for us but my layman's stab at it is the
science is properly construed have
access only to the material world what
we can what we can perceive there are
five senses and there's no reason to
suppose that that encompasses all the
world are all realities that the right
wing I think that's a good way it's a
partial way certainly I would reject the
idea that the sciences have
exclusive access to the material world
there are other ways of dealing with the
material world the Yankees don't train
their pitchers in terms of material
science and the development of the human
body really is a part of the of the
material world but it's not necessarily
the focus of a of a group of science
when we talk about performance in the
arts so there are other access other
ways of accessing the material world but
the the important thing is that these
dominating terms for example natural
naturalism when you try to look at them
more clearly they turn out to be
inordinately spongy there's really
nothing under the term itself I mean we
all know that to be natural is somehow
to be good it's like a Swedish nudist
documentary all natural and see any
number of Swedes prancing on a beach
that's natural all right it's natural
but what does the word mean what does
the word mean and why should we pay such
serious attention to scientific
propagandists who wish to insist that
only this kind of inquiry makes sense
makes sense scientifically or make sense
intellectually after all mathematics is
a paradigmatic case of a science that
has nothing to do with natural anything
so so what I'm again I'm trying to
reduce this to a layman's term that what
you're saying there is don't be overawed
by someone saying hey I'm a scientist
and BM and atheist don't suppose that
statement B derives any particular
theory that's what you're saying right
the comparable claim would be a I'm a
scientist beyond an expert on contract
law right
oh you expert on contract law because
you study particle physics give me a
break right expert on the existence of
God because you started the study
particle physics I request the same
break the same suspension of belief the
same absence of commitment to whatever
it is you're saying and these guys are
because shameless just shameless a David
two quotations are atheist author Sam
Harris quotation burr one religious
faith is on the wrong side of an
escalating war of ideas science must
destroy religion close quote quotation
number two from become
Pentium of the catechism of the Catholic
Church quote there can never be a
contradiction between faith and science
because both originate in God it is God
Himself who gives us both the light of
reason and of faith close quote
which statement strikes you as the most
pretentious well the first certainly
engenders a single reaction yeah yeah
that sound ha
okay the sort of thing some of my
college sophomores would say when they
had read a little bit of HL Mencken yeah
yeah okay let's go onto the next subject
the position of the Catholic Church is
much more balanced nuanced subtle and
suggestive I don't think it's
pretentious at all I think there's an
enormous body of serious discussion
behind it I won't go so as so far as to
say I endorse it wholeheartedly but it's
a reasonable statement it comes much
closer than anything sam harris is
saying to capturing where we happen to
be in the early part of the 21st century
segment to Darwin good old boy good old
boy the devil's delusion quote quote
this is quite a quotation it's only a
few words but it's packs a punch yes it
does two of them I think suspicions
about Darwin's theory arise for two
reasons the first the theory makes
little sense the second it is supported
by little evidence
close quote all right let's take those
one at a time evolution makes little
sense evolution is in the air it's so
widely accepted it's in the air of the
New York Times that's for sure and it's
in the mouth of every evolutionary
biologist but that doesn't exhaust the
cosmos let me ask you a question if
those two propositions you were to
exceed or completely true would it
change your mind that that other two
quotations that evolution makes little
the theory makes little sense in and of
itself and it's supported by little
evidence David it wouldn't change my
mind because I'm so completely on your
side oh well I mean if you were on the
others if I were on the other side yes
but I would do everything I could to
they mean that sort of sort of like the
vampire
but style change no one's mind and that
really really about the discussion do
you think would change richard balkan
spine mmm well sir why do you say that
the theory in itself makes a little
sense what's it say
whatever survives survives now I knew
that before because I didn't have to
study Darwin it's taught a large it's
empty
it's empty it's empty it doesn't tell us
anything else survived spark I'll
believe that but that's not a theory
that's just a string of what sponges on
a clothesline that doesn't tell us
anything deep about biological structure
no yeah a lot of variations children
don't look exactly like their parents
thank goodness and their children will
be slightly different too but does that
tell us why startling complex structures
arise in the history of life well it
doesn't have anything to do with this is
it is supported by little evidence now
that I have to say did startled me to
hear you say that evolution is supported
by little evidence what is the evidence
that's forever being introduced well
then I can tell you little boy father
took me to the Museum of Natural History
in New York there it is around on the
west side of Manhattan Europe and all
the plaques say that said then what they
say now which is this dinosaur came at
such-and-such and is it such and such a
pretty now there are charts on the wall
saying somehow or other how we got from
those dinosaurs to creatures that are
alive today I'm not a dad and there are
arrows connecting the creatures indeed
there are where would the arrows
discovered that the museum won't tell
you there is such a load of inferential
adjustment made even the most plausible
of evolutionary secrets I mean take
reptile to map that's a beautiful
evolutionary sequence it looks like one
organism is being slaughtered right
after the other and tremendously
interesting changes where bones in the
jaw migrate to become the three bones in
the year the structure of the mouth
changes completely
that's the best or the whale sequence
you know some sort of terrestrial animal
becomes a whale over roughly nine
million years but that doesn't amount to
an elaboration of anything more than the
discovery of fossils that could be
slotted in an ever
illusionary way could be but what we
lack is the analytic refinement to tell
us whether they are or have been slotted
in this way it is simply an exercise and
conditional plausibility yeah it could
have happened that way no one in my side
of the table is saying no it's
impossible it happened that way what
we're saying is that the evidence is
remarkably remarkably constrained meager
insufficient inadequate and lacking all
forms of analytic sufficiency well so
I'm on your side but your strengths a
bit overwhelming I'm sorry I sort of
know I feel the impulse to be on your
side I hadn't thought it through in
anything like this so how is it that
evolution that Darwin comes along and
within what seems like 27 seconds he's
carried the field that is to say
intellectually in the Academy he's just
carried the field by the turn of the
20th century
Darwin is the dominant way of looking at
the evolution of speed the development
of species how did that happen I mean I
can see that it's taxonomically useful
that you it gives you a way of putting
the final bones in order you can now you
have a filing cabinet you understand
what could lead to another but but
actually doesn't happen that Marxism
swept its fields swept it's so
thoroughly and completely that a hundred
million people had to die before someone
realized you know that's not such such a
swell theory at all that theory may have
certain problems now the same gravamen
doesn't stand against Darwin's theory
but let's face it academics throughout
the Western world form a native
conspiracy class and they are very akin
to a criminal class they'll believe
anything
and once they believe something the
conspiracy is held tenaciously
what were very good reasons Darwinian
theory was accepted in the academic
world way before it entered public
relations world the world of the media
world of those papers or television that
was accepted because it was a form of
power it was an advantageous acquisition
to be able to say well you guys out
there the Bible Belt don't understand a
thing but we understand life
and knowledge is power in the academic
world and that was a devastating
acquisition the more so since it allowed
academics to participate in a cultural
war against religion a rival center of
power Richard Dawkins one of the most
prominent a theist of the day quote
although atheism might have been
logically tenable before Darwin Darwin
made it possible to be an intellectually
fulfilled atheist what do you make of
that
it depends what they're filled was
doesn't know but they put the most
charitable what did what what is he
getting at people respond talk into the
books sell that quotation you just type
in Richard Dawkins plus in this
quotation comes up ten thousand times on
google it gets its beauty why do people
respond to this Darwinism provides a
mythological framework for a scientific
theory it provides an account of human
origins of provides an account of
biological origins provides an account
of change and that account at every
point is the substitute for a biblical
account that is the the accounts that we
had all been led to believe say before
1859 or essentially biblical they began
in the beginning God created the heavens
in there mm-hmm
to be an atheist before Darwin Richard
Dawkins is arguing would be to leave
unexplained the very point that the
Bible or the Christian Jewish tradition
does explain the origins of life in
terms of that tradition the origins of
life occur because God breathed upon
inert inactive matter and created life
for the first time Darwin seemed to
provide a framework in which that wasn't
necessary or more precisely it wasn't
necessary in as far as an alternative
miracle was available that is the
miracle is currently being promoted for
the origins of life it is a creation
myth without a creator that's right
all right segment three Big Bang the
devil's delusion again scientists the
Big Bang and the anthropic principle by
the way to cover both if we if we
may draw the devil the devil's delusion
scientist the physicist Paul Davies is
observed are slowly waking up to an
inconvenient truth the universe looks
suspiciously like a fix the issue
concerns the very laws of nature
themselves close quote
explain that if you would well Paul
Davies is one of a number of physicists
certainly not the only one Fred Hoyle
who was a very serious 20th century
astrophysicist came to the same
conclusion he said the universe looks
like it's been monkeyed with by a super
intellect things are so precisely
coordinated numerical values for certain
parameters is so finely adjusted and if
they were perturbed in any way things
would collapse or the universe would
become chaotic or living systems
couldn't arise that we cannot conclude
that this was all the result of any kind
of accidental process its inherent in
the design but when we look at the laws
of nature nothing in the laws of nature
suggest it must be this way the design
is inherent in the numerical parameters
and certain properties we see in the
universe but we have no good account for
this the laws of nature are silent they
are what they are they can work with any
numerical within any numerical
evaluation or range so all of these guys
and it's Fred Hoyle that's Paul Davies
Stephen Hawking once was talking about
this any thoughtful physicist will say
why is the universe the way it is why is
the universe the way it is precisely the
way it is when what we might expect
rationally is a generic universe generic
is a term of mathematics meaning what
you would ordinarily expect the most
likely kind of case and we're very far
from generousity in the universe we're
highly unlikely kind of structure we
inhabit and the question is why is that
now one answer to Fred Hoyle is that the
universe looks as if it were monkeyed
bias monkeyed with by a super intellect
is it was monkeyed with by a super
intellect things were set up just so
another answer is we really don't know
it's one of the enigmas of modern
science a third answer is there are many
many many thousands millions of other
universes and what is unlikely and this
one may be likely when we consider all
of them so how much I'm trying to the
anthropic principle the suggestion is
your suggestion is that it's reasonable
to suppose that it was set up that is to
say the laws of the universe are
consistent with the notion of the
judeo-christian idea of a creator who
set it up
i think john paul ii said that man is
the only creature that God willed for
his own sake so that if if the belief is
that this is all set up to produce human
beings that's consistent with what we
see in the incomplete okay but you're
not saying you're saying only that it's
consistent you're not taking it a step
further to argue that it is evidence or
even suggestive that there may be a
creator because after all again the
crude layman's attempt to grasp the
argument here
you spin the roulette wheel and the ball
falls on number seven and you could
spend the rest of your life saying with
all those possible slots why did it fall
on number seven why should that have
been well it was because it was it was
the ax right so so you can't really get
very far
you can't construct much of a proof of
the existence of an operator of it you
can't no you can't but you can construct
an argument something short of a proof
all right I agree if the ball drops in
the slot Mach number seven just once you
can say well and you get a big payoff
it's interesting drop once if it drops
in number seven again and again and
again at some point you would be
entitled to scratch your head and say
you know the game must be fixed or I
must be inordinately favored to be
winning it like this but I'm not going
to say I'm lucky that doesn't seem to me
a perfectly appropriate answer at some
point luck runs out as we all know
alright now we move to the Big Bang
again I quote the devil's delusion the
best data we have concerning the Big
Bang the Nobel laureate Arno Penzias
remarked are exactly what I would have
predicted and I nothing to go on but the
five books of Moses the Psalms the Bible
as a whole
close quote that's a wonderful wonderful
quotation now this is one of one of them
the two people who discovered the
microwave background radiation for which
he got a Nobel Prize this is a serious
guy yeah he's a serious guy and he
didn't know what he was discovering he
who was very lucky he struck pure gold
he thought he was examining pigeon
droppings on his antenna and he finally
found a nose the signal from the
microwave background radiation but he
like many other physicists initially
confronting the facts of the Big Bang
which you'd better summarize for us the
Big Bang means that apparently in the
universe exploded into in existence from
nothingness around 14 or 15 million
years ago billion years ago
it's an occurrence for which we have no
causal explanation now the plenty of
theories about it there plenty of
attempts to go back behind the Big Bang
and see what was going on behind it but
right now one of the obdurate facts one
of the irremovable facts of cosmology is
that 14 to 15 billion years ago there
was a universe small tensely hot tensely
compact tensely curved and before that
there was nothing not even space and
time before that and the point is that
fiat Luc's yeah let there be light is as
consistent with the data as any other is
precisely consistent with the data it is
a prediction although not a quantitative
prediction that astonished the community
of physicists in the 1960s astonished
Einstein in the 1920s when he realized
the field equations of general
relativity particularly expanding
universe
and Einstein understood right away of
its expanding expanding from something
and he rejected it he didn't like the
idea he wanted a steady state universe
lasting from all eternity from one
attorney to another
eternity but the Hubble data persuaded
him he was wrong okay so again we with
the anthropic principle it's not a proof
no but sure is suggestive that's your
argument
and the Big Bang it's not a proof it
could be simply because it could be but
it is I guess what I'm trying to do is
to get you to distinguish between your
judgment in these matters between saying
it's merely consistent with the
judeo-christian view of a creator who
brought it all into being or you'd like
to suggest that it points in that
direction there's something positively
suggestive about it it's certainly
moving and disturbing that in the 20th
century cosmology should have rejected a
ancient view of the universe as moving
from the of elastic to the everlasting
with no origin and embraced a completely
different view but one that is no way
new it's part of the religious tradition
I think I would like to to rest my
commitment by saying this is strange
unexpected moving and very curious
certainly certainly someone who objects
is indignantly as I do to claims of
having discovered a proof made by the
likes of Dawkins or Sam Harris or the
other scientists arguing in this realm
with respect to the existence of God I'm
not about to say I've discovered a proof
to the contrary the language of proofs
is appropriate to mathematics not to a
discussion like this what is appropriate
to a discussion like this is
philosophical argumentation and we
cannot close the day by saying one side
is definitively the possession of an
argument so fine so thick and so
powerful that it ends all discussion
they want in the discussions won't in
but a little a bit of balance would be
welcome segment for where do a theists
get their morality on this program in
2007 and exchange Peter Robinson saying
to the guest quoting myself here if
Christopher Hitchens does not believe in
God then where does he get a sense of
right and wrong to which Christopher
replied
I think it's degrading to state that
absent a celestial dictatorship we
wouldn't know right from wrong
I think our knowledge of right and wrong
is innate in us we know we can't get
along if we permit permit perjury theft
murder rape all societies at all times
ever bidden such behavior how does David
Berlinski respond I'm not sure I mean
I've heard Krista patron say the same
thing I'm not sure that so far as these
particular as separations go there is
any real point of dispute I mean I think
it's true that we know right from wrong
at least most people do most of the time
that's hardly the question is it
knowledge of right and wrong doesn't
take us very far why should we be right
when we could as easily be wrong well
what do you make of is that
Christopher's answer there redefines the
common understanding of right and wrong
what he's really saying is useful and
not useful socially useful and not
socially is look at the history of the
20th century and try to account them for
the history of the 20th century in terms
of agreeable usefulness it is an
intellectual category of splendid
irrelevance splendid irrelevance I mean
not the execution of swabbing out the
death cells from their loads of blood or
communist saws sending people in as
tyrants sending people to Siberia to the
to the Arctic death camps they had no
use for usefulness they had nothing
constraining their behavior in terms of
the traditional apparatus of a celestial
dictatorship I think that word is fine
although there is some appropriate
attach to it but that's exactly what
Ewan beings have always said we need
someone cracking the whip over us so I
take your discussion of morality and the
20th century in the devil's delusion to
be another form of the argument that you
make with the anthropic principle and
the big bang that is to say religious
people would say there is natural there
is an objective right and wrong there is
a law of God and if you don't obey it
terrible consequences will follow
and you make the point that terrible
consequences have fun would follow yes
right so again that's not a proof for
the existence of God but it sure is
suggestive that's what you're saying or
we could put it in the fashion of
Christopher Hitchens it's not a proof of
the existence of God it's certainly a
suggestion about his usefulness okay so
all the laws of heaven and earth
dr. Johnson remarked are unable to
prevent man from its crimes
surely relaxing the laws of heaven and
earth shall not dispose men to better
behavior that seems to be self-evident
all right now David we it's impossible
to discuss the horrors of the 20th
century without mentioning the Holocaust
and you have a very moving dedication
here in The Devil's delusion to your
mother's father your grandfather and you
write the dedication in German and it
concludes in Auschwitz Berlin missing in
Auschwitz but much more to the point
disappeared
disappear in Auschwitz disappeared in
Auschwitz better translation so how do
you handle the datum of the Holocaust in
some ways it's an utterly elementary
question you may find it as a question
or interesting but it's not easy to
answer if there were a God how could
such a thing happen it's a terribly
difficult question but but look if we
take the period from 1939 to 1945 look
at 1945 the Jewish people yet live
Hitler's target the Third Reich that
lies smashed to smithereens under the
tank treads of Russian tanks or blown to
bits by American and British airplanes
and everyone who survived the third rush
must survive drowned in morning or
consumed with grief that doesn't strike
me as a whole lot less than a biblical
adjudication of those war years not
pleasant but no one reading the Old
Testament comes away convinced that the
god of Wrath is a
Leigha Rotarian he is a god of Wrath if
he chose to kill nine million people to
make a point and then destroy their
persecutors remember Lincoln's second
inaugural address the conclusion he
reaches we must still say as was said
long ago righteous and just of the
decisions of the Lord he was talking
about a terrible war - in the devil's
delusion David you construct a kind of
syllogistic progression to show that
this is another way you show that
religious questions can be perfectly
reasonable
let me quote it to you if the universe
is contingent there is no saying whether
it existed forever maybe maybe not
that's point one point two if anything
might not exist then it is reasonable to
ask why it does exist point two and
point three well why does it exist I
mean really yeah how does David
Berlinski answer the question I don't
think there is an answer in terms of the
traditional body of knowledge we
associate with physics
I don't think physics is now in a
position to answer that question and my
suspicion is it will never be in a
position to answer that question but it
is a very good question
and it is a question that while it
cannot be answered from the physical
tradition can certainly be asked from
the physical condition tradition and
that's something very interesting the
existence of a class of questions that
can be asked within a physical theory
but not answered within a physical
theory and I think when you look at
those kinds of questions about what is
the universe exists what are the causal
conditions that make a universe possible
what are the necessary and sufficient
conditions for bringing our universe
into existence then you have the
beginning of a sense of intellectual
humility you're pretty sure that Richard
Dawkins and sam Harris and even my
friend Christopher Hitchens can't answer
those questions yeah
segment five of our final segment alas
taking science on faith in the devil's
delusion you're right and I quote
Western science is saturated by faith
what do you mean you run an experiment
you put your hands your on laboratory
equipment you go away for a cup of
coffee you're taken up you come back you
expect the experiment that we can
continued that when you put your hands
in the laboratory equipment will be the
same things are continuous from one
moment to another the universe doesn't
shake itself and out in and out of
existence things are stable things are
predictable things are satisfactorily
amenable to investigation these are all
items of faith how do you know any of
these you project backwards from the
modern era to say what could have
happened in imperial times Roman
Imperial times how do you know this same
universe was there a thousand years ago
you're going to leave this table about
30 seconds how do you know what Kasim
isn't going to open at your feet Peter
you don't know that you take it on faith
and their thousands of remarks these
these are these are remarks within the
philosophical tradition pointing out the
extraordinary extent to which in order
to advance scientifically there's an
enormous body of assumptions that have
to be in place and those assumptions
can't be defended no science Aristotle
said ever defends its own first
principles and we can't even it's just a
logical point all right another
quotation from the devil's delusion
members of the National Academy of
Sciences are by and large persuaded that
there is no God men and women in their
millions that there is why should that
be so is a tremendous advantage in
belonging to the National Academy of
Sciences and the National Academy of
Sciences is an institutional source of
authority and power if these guys were
going to defer to the Vatican or to a
council of rabbis or to a group of
Muslim clerics much of their power and
influence would be discredited but that
is to take a cynical view the less
cynical view is that a certain amount of
education a certain amount of immersion
into a physical Theory not the same
thing is true emergent legal theory
tends to displace any other kind of
ideological affiliation and that is
transmitted or transmuted into a form of
denial there is only one truth that
happens to be the truth of plasma
physics that's what a plasma physicist
and why not 50 years studying plasma
physics that's the only truth you can
see so you're suggesting that atheism as
it expresses itself among scientists is
a kind of de formacin profession and of
course of course you find the same thing
in people who are completely committed
to wrapping cuban cigars that's how they
think of the universe universe can only
be illuminated in terms of a large cigar
being wrapped on a source of surprise
the world of matter again from the
devil's delusion revealed by the
physical sciences does not serve to
endow materialism with a familiar face
there are black holes and various
infernal singularities popping out of
quantum fields the elementary particles
appear as bosons or fermions reality is
remarkably baroque and it is
promiscuously catholic small c
Catholic so here throughout this book
David at one place you stated explicitly
you state I do not take as the burden of
my argument to prove the existence of
God right I take it only to demonstrate
that the scientists cannot yea disprove
the existence of God fine and that
that's but but the way this book
operates that's a kind of baseline you
get that on every page but there are
other pages where if you were graphing
the readers reaction intellectual
reaction there would be little spikes
here and there in which it seems that
you're saying more than that it seems
that you well right here you say that
science physical science properly
understood a true understanding of the
physical the material world around us
not only does it not mute or displace a
religious sensibility it excites a sense
of wonder and mystery I agree with that
no intention of concealing that I know
not seems my lord no I agree completely
that is a position in the book that I do
want to die it certainly does to the
responsive mind excite a sense of
religious possibility the passage about
material objects that you quote is one
intended to show the vacuous nough some
aterial as a category even within the
heart of physics there is no sense of a
material object that covers the sort of
inquiry that physicists are doing black
hole is not a physical or material
object look you smack your hand on the
table and then you smack your hand on
the table again how many times have you
smack your hand on the table - where is
that number - is that a physical object
no of course not and that pervades the
sciences the idea that the world of
matter is the world that matters is
simply not true or if it is true and
there's a wonderful remark by the
logician current girdle in talking about
materialism girdle was of course a great
genius and he had no patience for the
physical sciences and he said the only
way materialism ever ever survives is
that all of the properties that we would
want from a non material world from a
psychological or biological or religious
perspective I just slapped on top of a
material object and we described it as
material that's no answer I mean even
the most primitive parts of physics
force is force a material something we
have a very limited understanding of the
Newton what is force what is force we
don't know what is energy at a material
it's hard to say final question alas let
me give you one one more time let me
give you two quotations and just ask you
to respond quotation number one requires
a little bit of a setup the late
philosopher Sidney Hook remarkable man
Oh friend oh is that so
all right I didn't know that I never had
the chance to meet him in a year or two
before I even came here to the Hoover
Institution well but Sidney hook was an
avowed atheist not agnostic but atheist
and a friend of his this was the story
told to me by that friend said to Sidney
hook Sidney
if when you die you discover to your
surprise that there is a God after all
how will you explain yourself and Sidney
Hooke replied quote I tell God that he
had provided insufficient evidence close
quote
that's number one here's number two
Psalm 8 when I consider the heavens the
work of thy fingers the moon and the
stars which thou hast ordained what is
man that thou art mindful of him close
quote
which quotation which world view do you
find to use Richard Dawkins phrase more
intellectually fulfilling well I've
heard Sidney Hawk say the same thing oh
is that an old - yes alright why are you
talking about David I know God out there
no this is just just a lot of hooey I'll
have a tuna sandwich no there's very
little substance in that quotation and
of course there is a point of
presumption in that particular argument
Bertrand Russel also used the point of
presumption is that human beings
constructed as human beings are
constructed could so interact with God
as to be persuaded by the countenance of
the deity when they were left
unpersuaded but the evidence of his
handiwork that's a remarkable
presumption much more reasonable it
seems to me as those who cannot see the
handiwork will not be able to see the
countenance either there is a limitation
a kind of aspect blindness at work not
everyone appreciates motor on it's just
a fact the second quotation I think is
uh is it is a beautiful quotation but
there's a fine line from Gerard Manley
Hopkins the world is charged with the
grandeur of God it will flame out like
shining from shuch foil it gathers to a
greatness like the ooze of oil crushed
why do men then now not wreak his raw
generations have trod have trod have
trod I think that captures that
captain's very elegantly the spirit of
the psalm but also something of Sidney
hook something of zin 'i'm wide amend
and now not Rekha's rod
that's something I always acid knee we
always talk that we did talk about that
he thought it was a New York imperative
to be very tough all the time but what
he thought is heart of hearts that he
kept to himself actually I want to ask
this is going to be the final question
so we know that this program is watched
disproportionately by kids based college
kids so you have somebody in college
who's going to I don't know if you went
through this when you were an
undergraduate you're so you being you
you probably went through it at the age
of seven which is the sort of thing that
I went through when I was an
undergraduate college and you look
around and you realize that a lot of
very bright people are atheists and
since most people just numerically
speaking come from these millions and
millions who do believe to assume the
existence of a God there can be a really
quite disorienting moment and given your
gift given the various proclivities the
time the course interests of the student
the student may wish to investigate this
in his rigorous away as an 18 or 19 year
old can what advice would you give to
such a student to investigate the
question yeah yeah I would suggest to
any student entering college now 2011 do
what I'm sure he hasn't done go read the
Old Testament that should be your first
challenge now I always ask my students
mafia you read there have you read the
Bible oh yeah yeah I was about short
however when I interrogate the students
it turns up reading the Bible means they
have a Bible on their bookshelf
I said if you opened it yeah we've
opened it but opening it doesn't mean
reading it the Old Testament is the
greatest repository of human knowledge
and wisdom in the history of
civilization any culture any time any
place and that really should be the
first point of discussion because every
attitude current today in the discussion
from Richard Dawkins to me Christopher
Hitchens two lonely pastors in the Bible
Belt on Sunday morning
ranting from a particular text is
discussed in the Bible and there's a
character in the Bible who expresses
that point of view and there's sympathy
expressed for that point of view and
their reservation is expressed by the
sympathy there's enormous ly complex
rich
maduk piece of work that's the first
alright david Berlinski author of the
devil's delusion atheism and its
scientific pretensions thank you very
much oh my pleasure thank you for having
me I'm Peter Robinson for uncommon
knowledge thanks for joining us